---
layout: post
title: Gradle Cheat sheet
color: rgb(49, 191, 42)
tags: [open source]
---

### Gradle

To make it quick [Gradle][4] is an open source build tool. They moved from [groovy to kotlin][2] dsl as their main language, 
both have been there for multiple version, the real change is that the documentation will be oriented toward the kotlin examples first.
I would recommend the kotlin version too, however in 2023, it could still be possible find some edge case where groovy 
could be slightly more performant on complex build.

> Why not just use Maven? 🤪 

In my opinion one of the advantages of gradle over [Maven][3] are mainly thanks to the syntax, the `xml` of the maven build files can be really
bulky and hard to maintain, whereas the _groovy_ or _kotlin_ syntax of gradle is much more human-readable and maintainable.
The build "manifest" is not crowded with uninformative tags... less code for more logic is something I appreciate.

## Cheat sheet

In this article, I wanted to sum up some quick tips with gradle, and keep up with the newest syntax of the latest version.
Since I have already went through some specific use case, I might skip or not go into too many details, so if you are
interested check out those articles:

- [Java concepts][20] for an overview of java and gradle
- [Kotlin with Gradle 4.8][21] for an example setup with an old version of gradle
- [How to publish with Gradle][22], that showcase how to save a project in the GitHub Package Registry
- [How to set up gradle with OpenApi plugin][23] to generate code automatically during build 

And now let's proceed, get your `build.gradle.kts` ready!

### Wrapper

The Gradle wrapper is a script that _invokes a declared version of Gradle, downloading it beforehand if necessary_ as
per the [documentation][5]. It's a foundation for your project, to make it easier to build it consistently.
Create the gradle wrapper to call `./gradlew` in the version you want with:

```sh
gradle wrapper --gradle-version 8.2.1
```

That's useful when working with legacy projects that may use older gradle version, or if you want to set a working gradle
version in your project.

### Dependencies

To show the project dependencies use:

```shell
./gradlew dependencies
./gradlew dependencies --configuration <configuration>
```

The second one is to check the dependency tree for a specific configuration like `compileClasspath` or `kotlinCompilerClasspath`
for kotlin projects.

#### Add dependencies

To add a dependency, you need to add a repository from where to fetch it and the actual dependency:

```kotlin
repositories {
    mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation("org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-web")
    testImplementation("org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-test")
}
```

The `compile` and `testCompile` has been deprecated. For more info, check the [gradle][10] documentation.

#### Exclude dependencies

This is to either avoid conflicts with clashing dependencies or for any reason you wouldn't want a specific dependency in 
your project.
To [exclude][1] a dependency from your build, from all dependency use:

```kotlin
configurations.all {
  exclude(group= "org.group", module= "conflicting-lib")
}
```

To exclude from a specific configuration (here `testImplementation`), you can use:

```kotlin   
configurations.testImplementation {
    exclude(group = "junit", module = "junit")
}
```        

Why excluding junit 4 in this example? Because I don't want a mix of junit 4 and 5 in my project. And if the problem
is only in one dependency you can also exclude it from there only using:

```kotlin
testImplementation("org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-test") {
    exclude(module = "junit")
    exclude(module="junit-vintage-engine")
}
```

The `exclude` function is called in the closure of the `testImplementation` configuration for the `spring-boot-starter-test`
dependency.

### Multi project dependency

For your multi project build, you can follow the [gradle documentation][6].
And to add a subproject as a dependency of another project, you can check the [stackoverflow answer][7].

## Publishing

To publish, in a maven repository you will need the [maven-publish][8] plugin. Then you will need to add the publishing
script in your `build.gradle.kts`:

```kotlin
plugins {
    `maven-publish`
}

publishing {
    repositories {
        maven {
            name = "GitHubPackages"
            url = uri("https://maven.pkg.github.com/OWNER/REPOSITORY")
            credentials {
                username = 'username'
                password = 'password'
            }
        }
    }
    publications {
        create<MavenPublication>("gpr") {
            from(components["java"])
        }
    }
}

group="com.github.OWNER"
version="1.0-SNAPSHOT"
```

### Using properties

Properties are useful to avoid hardcoding values in your build file (e.g. passwords), to add one you can use:

```kotlin
val gprUser: String? by project
val gprApiKey: String? by project

credentials {
    username = gprUser
    password = gprApiKey
}
```

Then you can pass the properties via command line on publish

```shell
./gradlew publish -PgprUser="username" -PgprApiKey="password"
```

You can also save some variable in a `gradle.properties` file in your project root directory:

```properties
gprUser=username
```

There are [other ways][9] to pass the variables, with environment variables or without declared variables:

```kotlin
password = project.findProperty("gprApiKey") as String? ?: System.getenv("GPR_API_KEY")
```

## Tests

Using junit 5, you can improve your testing experience with gradle:

```kotlin
dependencies {
    testImplementation("org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter:5.9.2")
    testImplementation("org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter-api")
    testRuntimeOnly("org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter-engine")
}
```

Then to run your test, you can use the junit engine using `useJUnitPlatform` in your test task:

```kotlin
tasks.test {
    useJUnitPlatform()
    testLogging {
        showStandardStreams = true
        exceptionFormat = org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.logging.TestExceptionFormat.FULL
        events("skipped", "failed")
    }
    maxParallelForks = 3
}
```

The `maxParallelForks` is to run your tests in parallel, but it can't be higher than your number of cores. The `testLogging`
is optional as well to log the tests output in the terminal.

[1]: https://gradlehero.com/how-to-exclude-gradle-dependencies/#option-2-per-configuration-exclude-rules
[2]: https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/migrating_from_groovy_to_kotlin_dsl.html#prepare_your_groovy_scripts
[3]: https://maven.apache.org/
[4]: https://gradle.org/releases/
[5]: https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/gradle_wrapper.html
[6]: https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/multi_project_builds.html
[7]: https://stackoverflow.com/a/61682321/7747942
[8]: https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/publishing_maven.html
[9]: https://gradlehero.com/gradle-project-properties-best-practices/
[10]: https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_library_plugin.html
[20]: {% post_url 2018/2018-05-31-java-concepts %}
[21]: {% post_url 2019/2019-09-27-Kotlin-dsl-with-gradle %}
[22]: {% post_url 2021/2021-10-08-Use-github-hosted-package %}
[23]: {% post_url 2021/2021-07-19-Openapi-swagger-codegen-with-kotlin %}
