---
layout: post
title: Create a NestJS GraphQL API
color: rgb(230, 129, 104)
tags: [graphql]
---

We have talked previously about [NestJS][20] to create a REST backend API, 
but its purpose is greater, and it can also be used with GraphQL.
If you are new to [GraphQL][21], check out this [article][21] for some of the basics.

## Installation

Create a new NestJS application, and use the _generate resource_ command for GraphQL to get started.

```shell
npm install -g @nestjs/cli
nest new example -p npm
# Generate a new resource, select GraphQL
npm g resource book
```

Or follow the [quick start guide][1] on the NestJS documentation.

## GraphQL

### Schema first or code first?

One of the issue with GraphQL, is that you have the schema which represents what can be queried,
and then you have the resolvers which should match that schema and _resolves_ the values for it.

In order to avoid duplication and possible mistakes, you can either decide to choose as a source of truth:
- The _code_ which means the implementation will drive the creation of the schema
  - Perfect for a simple standalone GraphQL API 
  - Perfect when you don't _need_ to manage the schema
- The _schema_ which means the schema will be used to build the implementation objects
  - Perfect when you need to integrate with other teams (both can agree on the schema in advance)
  - Perfect to enforce GraphQL schema standard and a better GraphQL file structure

Both schema-first and code-first option are worth considering depending on your use case, but we are going
to explore the "_code first_" option here.

I do prefer the "_schema first_" approach, because you have to think it through before implementing.
But we have already talked about this approach with [GraphQL codegen][22], and NestJS has a similar approach where it can
dynamically or manually generate the objects from the schema. 

### Nest - GraphQL Integration

By default, NestJS is pushing for [Apollo][21] under the hood for the GraphQL driver.
To enable the GraphQL integration add the `GraphQLModule` from `@nestjs/graphql` in your _AppModule_.
This is a configuration for a _code-first approach_ with GraphQL:

```ts
@Module({
  imports: [
    GraphQLModule.forRoot<ApolloDriverConfig>({
      driver: ApolloDriver,
      autoSchemaFile: join(process.cwd(), 'src/schema.gql'),
      playground: true,
      context: ({ req }) => new AppContext(req),
    }),
  ],
  controllers: [AppController],
  providers: [AppService],
})

export class AppModule {}
```

For the GraphQL module option, we have:
- The `driver` to set the driver for the GraphQL module.
- The `autoSchemaFile` to set the path to generate the schema from the code.
- The `playground` is an apollo feature that lets you explore the GraphQL API when browsing to [localhost:3000/graphql]().
- The `context` function will be called once for each request, the created context will be passed down to each resolver. (It is usually used for authentication)

There are more options available, but those are the essential ones to get started.

> The schema gets auto-generated when `autoSchemaFile` is set when the app is started `npm start`.

If you have already created the GraphQL resource earlier, then you should have pretty much everything you need.
Else you can create a resolver using the nest cli:

```shell
nest g resolver book
```      

This will create the `book/book.resolver.ts` file to handle resolving the book resource.
For the unit tests, you can call the resolver function directly and assert the retrieved object.

### Resolver Implementation

#### GraphQL entity

As for the REST controller, NestJS has a whole set of annotations for resolvers.
Let's create our Book entity:

```ts
import { Field, Int, ObjectType } from '@nestjs/graphql';

@ObjectType({ description: 'Book' })
export class Book {
  @Field(() => Int, { description: 'Id of the Book' })
  id: number;
  @Field({ description: 'Title of the Book' })
  title: string;
  @Field(() => String, { description: 'Author of the Book' })
  author: string;
}
```

We have multiple annotations, you may have heard of them as [decorators][2] in typescript:
- The `@ObjectType` defines the class as a GraphQL type
- The `@Field` defines a GraphQL field of the type 
  - Adding a member to a class without this annotation won't be resolved by the GraphQL API (but will be returned in the unit test)
  - You can specify the GraphQL return type of the field, by default `number` is a GraphQL `Float`, we set it to `Int` with `() => Int`
  - Setting the GraphQL return type is optional when the typescript type can be directly converted to the GraphQL one (e.g. with _String_).

There's an option for all the GraphQL decorator to add the description of the field.
This will be used when generating the schema as GraphQL documentation.

#### GraphQL Query

Now that we have the entity, we can create a method to resolve it in the created _resolver_ file generated by the CLI.

```ts
@Resolver()
export class BookResolver {
  @Query(() => Book, { name: 'book' })
  async getBook(
    @Args('id', { type: () => Int }) id: number,
    @Context() context: AppContext,
  ) {
    return new Book(id);
  }
}
```

Let's decompose what we have here:
- The `@Resolver` annotation which define a GraphQL resolver class in NestJS for both queries and mutations
  - You can specify the return type of the resolver and use `@ResolveField` if you want a custom field resolver for a GraphQL Object. 
    In this case you can use the `@Parent` to get the parent-resolved object
- The `@Query` annotation which tells NestJS to resolve the `book` query using the `getBook` method.
  - The _name_ is optional, the GraphQL query will use the method name by default.
- The `@Args` annotation defines a GraphQL argument of the query, named `id`, and we use the `type` to specify that the number should be a GraphQL _Int_.
- The `@Context` annotation is used to get the context (from the executed function from the GraphQL module).
  - This is optional, in this example we don't use it.

As you may have noticed, I didn't need to create a `Book` dto, I can just return my entity and it works.

#### GraphQL Schema

Based on the implementation of our _Book_ entity and its query resolver, at the start of the application,
the generated graphql will look like this:

```graphql
"""Book"""
type Book {
  """Id of the Book"""
  id: Int!

  """Title of the Book"""
  title: String!

  """Author of the Book"""
  author: String!
}

type Query {
  book(id: Int!): Book!
}
```

As you can see the description from the annotation for each field is using `"""` on top of it.

### End-to-end test

To make an end-to-end test to your GraphQL API, you need to use same structure as in the `app.e2e-spec.ts` that was 
auto-generated when building the application so it can mount the application from the _AppModule_ which will have
the resolvers in it.

Then you can add your test as:

```ts
it('queries the book', async () => {
  const payload = await request(app.getHttpServer())
    .post('/graphql')
    .send({
      query: `query bookQuery($id: Int!) {
        book(id: $id) {
          id
          author
          title
        }
      }`,
      variables: { id: 1 },
    })
  expect(payload.status).toEqual(200);
  expect(payload.body.data.book).toEqual({ id: 1, author: 'author', title: 'title' });
});
```

In this test a GraphQL request to query the book is being made. 
As you can see the GraphQL endpoint is `/graphql` and using _supertest's_ `request` object we can craft a GraphQL query
to try against the server.
If the queries become too bulky, save the same as constant or build them using fragments with gql:

```ts
import { gql } from 'graphql-request';

// GraphQL fragment
const bookFragment = gql`
      fragment book on Book {
          id
          author
          title
      }
  `;
// Query to send
const bookQuery = gql`
      ${bookFragment}
      query bookQuery($id: Int!) {
          book(id: $id) {
              ...book
          }
      }
  `;
```

As you can see, in this case it's bulkier, but as you expand your API, 
having fragments of the returned object will make the query lighter.
Now to try it out in the test, you can just use `query: bookQuery` which at least makes it much less verbose. 👌

We had talked about [fragments][23] in this article about [advanced resolver][23] in GraphQL, you might want to check it out.
On the topic of today's article, that's all I have for now! 🙂

[1]: https://docs.nestjs.com/graphql/quick-start
[2]: https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/decorators.html
[20]: {% post_url 2024/2024-03-08-Nestjs-typescript-backend %}
[21]: {% post_url 2021/2021-07-26-Apollo-and-graphql %}
[22]: {% post_url 2023/2023-04-04-Generating-graphql-models-typescript %}
[23]: {% post_url 2022/2022-05-27-Graphql-advanced-resolver %}