---
layout: post
title: Manage your Kubernetes from the shell with K9s!
color: rgb(50, 56, 166)
tags: [kubernetes]
---


If you have worked with Kubernetes, you may have had to work with `kubectl` to run commands in your cluster.
While it's a powerful tool, I often go back to the [documentation][10] for commands that I use less often while troubleshooting.

Don't you always forget the `config` while trying to see the current context? I had made an article with common
[kubectl commands][10] to help me remember them.
Aliases do help like `alias k="kubectl"`, you could go further, but it's not very verbose or mnemonic for me.

So here the's the solution for a terminal-based _UI_ for Kubernetes: [K9s][1]!

## K9s

K9s is an [open source project][2] that behaves like an enhanced [vim][3] for Kubernetes. 
It makes it easier to navigate your cluster, manage and edit resources with vim like commands and a nice interface in
the terminal.

When you type `k9s` once installed in the terminal it should show:

{% include aligner.html images="k9s.png" column=1 %}

That's a little screenshot from the [official repository][2] of what it looks like.
It does support customization, but that's not really why I use it.


### Installation

On MacOS, I am using [zsh][11] as my shell in an [iTerm2][12] terminal, not that it should influence the installation,
but it might look slightly different on other systems.
You can install K9s via Homebrew using:

```shell
brew install derailed/k9s/k9s
```

Or follow the [official installation guide][5] for other platforms.
The process is for once pretty straightforward, and you can start using it right away.
(You do need a K8s cluster running, but that's another story).


### Shortcut

I am using *Version: v0.31.9* and I have compiled a list of useful commands or shortcuts to best use k9s.
You can find more information in the [documentation][4] as well.
The use of <kbd>:</kbd> to enter the command made me remember `vim` commands, so it was easier to get into it.

- Quit K9s:
    - <kbd>:</kbd> + <kbd>q</kbd> as in [vim][3] then enter to send the command and quit.
    - <kbd>ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>c</kbd> also works.
- Find a resource:
    - <kbd>:</kbd> then type the resource type (`deployment`, `services` but also `namespace` or `context`)
    - It auto-populates and lets you dive in with <kbd>enter</kbd> in it, which can be useful for exploring the cluster.
    - <kbd>ESC</kbd> to exit the search or go back to the previous "page"
- Multi selection:
    - <kbd>space</kbd> to select multiple resources
- Show logs:
    - <kbd>l</kbd> to show logs of the selected pod, you can also use this command on a deployment to see all the logs
    of the deployment's pods.
- Search in the screen (for logs but even pods as well):
    - <kbd>/</kbd> then type the search term
    - <kbd>ESC</kbd> to exit the search and browse through the search results
    - Useful when you want to <kbd>ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>d</kbd> to delete multiple pods at once, for example.
- Enter the pod's shell:
    - <kbd>s</kbd> to open a shell in the selected pod/deployment
    - Once in the shell type `exit` to exit it.
- Edit the manifest of a resource:
    - <kbd>e</kbd> to edit the manifest of the selected resource
    - It opens a `vim` editor, so you will need to use `:wq` to save and quit or `:q!` to quit without saving the changes.

With these commands you should be able to handle most of your day-to-day tasks with _k9s_ without being a pro `kubectl`
exper user.
If I missed a key feature, or you have a killer command, let me know in the comments!

## Conclusion

K9s is a neat tool to manage your Kubernetes cluster from the terminal.
I like the terminal-based UI which gives me the same type of output as the command without having to pass a `-f` flag
to avoid continuously typing `get` commands.

Give it a try or let me know in the comment what's your preferred tool to deal with Kubernetes! ⎈

[1]: https://k9scli.io/
[2]: https://github.com/derailed/k9s
[3]: https://www.vim.org/docs.php
[4]: https://k9scli.io/topics/commands/
[5]: https://k9scli.io/topics/install/
[10]: {% post_url 2019/2019-08-21-Kubernetes-hands-on %}
[11]: {% post_url 2021/2021-03-22-Mac-custom-terminal %}
[12]: {% post_url 2019/2019-10-21-Mac-Tips %}